The generations of computer are as follows: First Generation of Computer (1937 – 1946): In  1937  the  first  electronic  digital  computer  was  built  by  Dr.  John  V. Atanasoff  and  Clifford  Berry.  It  was  called  the  Atanasoff-Berry  Computer 
 12  (ABC). In  1943 an electronic  computer name  the Colossus  was built  for the military. Other developments continued until in 1946 the first general– purpose digital computer, the Electronic Numerical Integrator and Calculator (ENIAC) was built. It is said that this computer weighed 30 tons, and had 18,000 vacuum tubes which was used for processing. When this computer was turned on for the first time lights dim in sections of Philadelphia. Computers of this generation could only perform single task, and they had no operating system.  Characteristics: i. Sizes of these computers were as large as the size of a room. ii. Possession of Vacuum Tubes to perform calculation. iii. They used an internally stored instruction called program. iv. Use capacitors to store binary data and information. v. They use punched card for communication of input and output data and information vi. They generated a lot of heat. vii. They have about One Thousand 1000 circuits per cubic foot. Examples: i. Mark I developed by Aiken in 1944. ii. Electronic  Numerical  Integrator  and  Calculator  (ENIAC)  built  at  the Moore School for Engineering of the University of Pennsylvania in 1946 by J. Presper Eckert and William Mauchley. iii. Electronic  Discrete  Variable  Automatic  Computer  (EDVAC)  also developed in 1947 by Eckert and Mauchley.    
 13  Second Generation of Computer (1947 – 1962): Second generation  of computers used  transistors instead of  vacuum tubes which were more reliable. In 1951 the first computer for commercial use was introduced to the public; the Universal Automatic Computer (UNIVAC 1). In 1953 the International Business Machine (IBM) 650 and 700 series computers made their mark in the computer world. During this generation of computers over  100  computer  programming languages  were  developed,  computers  had memory and operating systems. Storage media such as tape and disk were in use also were printers for output.  Characteristics: i. The computers were still large, but smaller than the first generation of computers. ii. They use transistor in place of Vacuum Tubes to perform calculation. iii. They were produced at a reduced cost compared to the first generation of computers. iv. Possession of magnetic tapes as for data storage. v. They  were  using  punch  cards  as  input  and  output  of  data  and information.  The  use  of  keyboard  as  an  input  device  was  also introduced. vi. These computers were still  generating a  lot of  heat in which  an air conditioner is needed to maintain a cold temperature. vii. They have about one thousand circuits per cubic foot. Example: i. Leprechaun, IBM built by Bell Laboratories in 1947 ii. Transis produced by philco, GE and RCA. iii. UNIVAC 1107, UNIVAC III. iv. RCA 501. 
 14  v. IBM 7030 stretch.  Third Generation of Computer (1963 – 1975): The  invention  of  integrated  circuit  brought  us  the  third  generation  of computers. With this invention computers became smaller, more powerful more reliable and they are able to run many different programs at the same time.  Characteristics: i. They used  large-scale integrated  circuits, which  were used  for both data processing and storage. ii. Computers  were  miniaturized,  that  is,  they  were  reduced  in  size compared to previous generation. iii. Keyboard and mouse were used for input while the monitor was used as output device. iv. Use  of  programming  language  like  COBOL  and  FORTRAN  were developed. v. They have hundred thousand circuits per cubic foot. Examples: i. Burroughs 6700, Mini computers ii. Honeywell 200 iii. IBM system 360 iv. UNIVAC 9000 series. Fourth Generation of Computer (PC 1975 – Current)   At this time of technological development, the size of computer was re-divided to what we called Personal Computers, PC. This was the time the first Microprocessor  was  created  by  Intel. The  microprocessor was  a  very  large-scale, that is, VLS integrated circuit which contained thousands of transistors. 
 15  Transistors  on  one  chip  were  capable  performing  all  the  functions  of  a computer’s central processing unit. Characteristics: i. Possession  of  microprocessor  which  performs  all  the  task  of  a computer system use today. ii. The size of computers and cost was reduced. iii. Increase in speed of computers. iv. Very large scale (VLS) integrated circuits were used. v. They have millions of circuits per cubic foot. Examples: i. IBM system 3090, IBM RISC6000, IBM RT. ii. ILLIAC IV. iii. Cray 2 XMP. iv. HP 9000. v. Apple Computers. Fifth Generation of Computers (Present and Beyond)   Fifth generations computing devices, based on artificial intelligence (AI) are  still  in  development, although  there  are some  application  such  as  voice recognition, facial face detector and thumb print that are used today. Characteristics: i. Consist of extremely large scale integration. ii. Parallel processing iii. Possession of high speed logic and memory chip. iv. High performance, micro-miniaturization. 
 16  v. Ability  of  computers  to  mimic  human  intelligence,  e.g.  voice recognition, facial face detector, thumb print. vi. Satellite links, virtual reality. vii. They have billions of circuits per cubic. Examples: i. Super computers ii. Robots iii. Facial face detector iv. Thumb print